Intro



Scuba diving is a type of underwater diving whereby divers use breathing equipment that is completely independent of a surface air supply
"Scuba" is an acronym for "Self-Contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus"
coined by Christian J. Lambertsen in a patent submitted in 1952.
compressed air affords scuba divers
greater independence and movement than surface-supplied divers
more time underwater than free divers
Open circuit scuba systems discharge the breathing gas into the environment as it is exhaled. Air is supplied to the diver through a diving regulator
Done recreationally and professionally in a number of applications, including scientific, military and public safety roles,


Procedures



Preparation for the dive
Standard diving procedures
Water entry procedures , Buddy checks, buoyancy control, Mask and regulator clearing, equalization of pressure, 
Decompression
short, shallow, decompression stop known as a safety stop to further reduce risk before surfacing
Allows gradual adjustment to higher pressure from resurfacing
Post-dive procedures
debriefing where appropriate, and equipment maintenance, and dive log
If a diver is planning on doing multiple dives in a day, they need to know what the depth and duration of previous dives were in order to calculate residual inert gas levels in preparation for the next dive
Emergency procedures
The most urgent underwater emergencies usually involve a compromised breathing gas supply
Divers are trained in procedures for donating and receiving breathing gas from each other in an emergency


Entry  Level Skills



Preparing and dressing in the diving suit
Assembly and pre-dive testing of the scuba set.
Entries and exits between the water and the shore or boat.
Breathing from the demand valve
Recovering and clearing the demand valve.
Clearing water from the mask, and replacing a dislodged mask.
Buoyancy control using weights and buoyancy compensator.
Finning techniques, underwater mobility and manoeuvering.
Making safe and controlled descents and ascents.
Equalisation of the ears and other air spaces.
