Production

Lucas made a conscious effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between the prequel and original trilogy
There are references to Christianity in the prequel trilogy, such as the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil, complete with red skin and horns
The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker; he is the "Chosen One"—the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force—who was conceived of a virgin birth.


Plot Points

Phantom Menace
32 years before the events of the original film, two Jedi Knights—Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi—discover that the corrupt Trade Federation has formed a blockade around the planet Naboo. 
Naboo's senator Palpatine—who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious—has covertly engineered the blockade as a pretext to become Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic. With the help of Naboo's fourteen-year-old queen, Padmé Amidala, and accompanied by a clumsy native named Jar Jar Binks, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape the blockade. 
They land on Tatooine to repair their starship, and meet a nine-year-old slave named Anakin Skywalker. Believing him to be the prophesied "Chosen One", Qui-Gon takes Anakin to be trained as a Jedi.


Plot Points

Attack of The Clones
10 years later, an assassination attempt is made on Padmé Amidala, who is now serving as Naboo's senator after finishing her term as queen. 
Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi and his apprentice, Anakin, are assigned to protect her; 
Obi-Wan tracks the assassin, while Anakin and Padmé secretly fall in love. 
Meanwhile, Chancellor Palpatine schemes to draw the galaxy into the Clone Wars between the Republic army of clone troopers led by the Jedi, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems led by Darth Sidious' Sith apprentice, Count Dooku


Plot points

Revenge of the Sith
Three years into the Clone Wars, Anakin becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and begins to have visions of Padmé dying in childbirth. 
Palpatine convinces Anakin that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé's life. 
Desperate, Anakin submits to Palpatine and assumes the Sith moniker Darth Vader. 
Palpatine reveals himself as Darth Sidious to the Jedi and orders their extermination while declaring the former Republic an Empire. 
Vader engages in a lightsaber duel with Obi-Wan on the volcanic planet Mustafar which results in Vader getting disfigured and losing both his legs and his left arm, while Padmé dies after giving birth to twins.


Reception

The prequel trilogy received mixed reviews, generally improving in critical reception with each installment.
over-reliance on computer-generated imagery and green screens, melodramatic and wooden dialogue (including scenes of romance between Anakin and Padmé), slow-paced political scenes,[53] and the comic relief character of Jar Jar Binks, whose role was reduced after the first film.
Contrarily, Ewan McGregor's portrayal of Obi-Wan Kenobi, following in the footsteps of Alec Guinness, has been generally praised
Natalie Portman has expressed her disappointment with the trilogy's negative reception, saying that "When something has that much anticipation it can almost only disappoint." 
